Understand what a medical mask protects you from. Medical or surgical masks are intended to cover both your mouth and nose. They are designed with material that can block large-particle droplets, splashes, sprays and splatter — all of which may contain viruses or bacteria that may be harmful to you.
Know the difference between a medical mask and an N95 respirator. An N95 respirator is a device used by health practitioners to block 95% of very small particles. Unlike medical masks, N95 respirators fit more securely on your face and against your skin, and are able to filter airborne particles.[5]
While an N95 respirator can block 95% of very small particles — very small being considered 0.3 microns — there is still a 5% chance harmful particles can penetrate the respirator.
N95 respirators are not designed for use by children or by people who have facial hair.
Some N95 masks come with an exhalation valve that is designed to reduce condensation build-up inside the mask and allow the wearer to breathe easier. These masks, however, should not be used in a situation where a sterile field is required as the exhalation valve allows unfiltered (and possibly contaminated) air to leave the mask.[6]
In general, each type of N95 mask should come with detailed instructions from the manufacturer explaining how to put on and take off the mask. In order to ensure proper protection for both you and your patients, these instructions — above all others — must be followed. The Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA) also requires that users are trained how to fit and use N95 respirators.
Clean your hands. Before touching a clean medical mask, wash your hands thoroughly with both soap and water.[8]
Once you’ve applied soap to your wet hands, you should rub your hands together to wash them for at least 20 seconds before rinsing them off.[9]
Always use a clean paper towel to dry your hands, and then place that paper towel into a trash bin.
Check the medical mask for defects. Once you’ve taken a new (unused) medical mask from the box, check it to ensure it doesn’t contain any defects, holes or tears in the material. If the mask has defects, holes or tears, throw it away and select another new (unused) mask from the box.[10]
